In this video I'm going to talk more about plotting and computing sine and cosine and also the tangent.
Now you've already encountered sine and cosine.
Many many times in this course.
But there is going to be some new things in this video including a discussion and demonstration of resolution
when translating formulas into code.
Now if you're not really sure what I mean here then don't worry that will all become clear very soon.
So let's immediately switch to Python and get started the first thing I want to do is just make a plot
of sine and cosine over time.
So let's say known pi Lynn space.
Let's go from zero to six.
PI and how about in 400 steps.
So let's plot x by sign of X and I'll make this a red line and let's also give these legend labels so
this is going to be sine of theta and then I want to plot cosine on top of this.
So let's see this is gonna be cosine of theta and I'll change this to cosine of theta and activate the
legend and show the plot Oh yeah.
That should be blue
so let's see.
I'm gonna add an ex label so plot ex label and let's call this radians.
Actually people often abbreviate radians as rad and then the Y label is simply the function values.
I'll just say the function value now.
The thing is I don't like having this word theta here.
I would like this to be the actual Greek symbol for theta.
So to do that I need to make this latex code.
But if you just put in a double slash like this that's not going to get interpreted as latex.
So to make sure that this is latex code I'm going to in case the strings inside these legends in dollar
signs.
So now that gets interpreted as a Theta symbol as the Greek character but now sine and cosine are italicized.
But I want these to be the reserved words sine and cosine the function sine and cosine.
So again I'm gonna put slashes in front of them and notice that sign up here is now not in italics is
just in regular upright letters but cosine is in italics.
Now when I run this again we get the correct legend.
Okay so far nothing terribly new.
You are probably familiar with the tangent function.
It's essentially just the ratio between sine and cosine.
So let's see what the tangent function looks like.
So let's plot this from Let's go.
Maybe I'll call this variable figure for theta.
So first is going to be equal to linearly space numbers between 0 and let's go to 4 pi am.
How about let's try you know how many steps do we need here.
Let's try 30 steps maybe.
And actually let me begin by changing this from 40 hour from 400.
Let's try 40.
Okay.
So you can see these functions still look pretty good at 40 at a resolution of 40 so 40 points here
although they are starting to get a little bit kind of blocky a little bit discourteous.
Now you can make this be really small and at some point it's going to be just ridiculous.
Okay.
So 4 is definitely not enough points.
How about 10 also really not enough points.
What I'm doing here is changing the resolution of this variable X and so the resolution is the number
of sample points per distance let's say.
So now the resolution is ten points per six pi.
Now that's not a common resolution.
I'm just literally interpreting how this variable is set up.
Okay so we've established that 10 is the resolution of 10 points here is too few.
One hundred looks pretty good.
And now let's see if we would increase the resolution by an order of magnitude.
So instead of 100 let's make it a thousand all right.
So that doesn't really look much better.
In fact it's kind of hard even to see the difference between a thousand points and one hundred points.
I guess if you look closely you can kind of see the difference.
So the take home message here is that with higher resolution you get better smoother more interpretable
plots but only up to a point.
Eventually you get to a point where having a higher resolution doesn't really help you.
It's just going to make the code longer to run.
So ten thousand is pretty excessive.
Now there is a whole theory in signal processing about resolution.
It's related to sampling theory and the Nyquil theorem and so on.
That's beyond the scope of this course.
That's something I talk more about in my course on signal processing but mostly I want to convey the
intuition that when you are disk retiring functions which happens when you evaluate functions in code
you have to think carefully about how many points you need in your X axis or y axis range.
OK so that said let's try this again with the tangent function and I think you will see this even more
extreme.
So let's say plots theta by known spider 10 of theta.
This is the function to compute the tangent and let's make this a black line.
So then we won P L T show and what have I done wrong here.
This is a stupid typo.
So this was t h but here I put an X I was still thinking about the previous pi.
Okay so now you see I think the resolution is pretty low.
What actually happens with tangent is that at each cycle tangent is going to blow up to minus to plus
infinity and then it's going to come down from minus infinite.
Now you don't really get that sense here.
It's going to be clear.
If I do let's say three hundred points and now you can see that this is still not blowing up to plus
infinity.
So maybe if we add more points.
Notice the range here is about 50 to a little under 200.
And now this range is getting higher and higher as I'm adding more and more numbers as the resolution
is getting higher.
And again this is happening because with more points we are better able to assess this small changes
in the function over time.
So when they are slow changes in the function then you don't need so many points when there's fast changes
in the function.
You need to have a lot more points.
So I'm going to zoom in here a bit.
So I want to change the Y limit to go from how about minus two to plus two.
Okay.
That's maybe we need a little bit more.
How about minus five to plus five.
Okay.
So now you're starting to see the dynamics of the tangent function that it blows up to plus infinity
and then it comes down from minus infinity and it goes up to plus infinity again.
Now if I go back to let's say three hundred three hundred actually it still looks pretty good.
How about 30.
Now you see that the resolution is too low for this function.
All right.
And again I'm not going to get into detailed discussions here about what is the appropriate level of
resolution.
Instead I just want to build some intuition that there are resolutions that are too low and there are
resolutions that are sufficient.
And then once you get to a sufficient level of resolution basically adding a higher resolution mostly
doesn't really help you.
It's just going to make the variables take up more space in Python's buffer.
So what is tangent what is tangent mean.
So the tangent is a function that is actually defined as the ratio between sine and cosine.
So if that's really true then we should be able to take sine divided by cosine and show that that is
equal to the tangent.
And that's what I'm going to do in this cell down here.
So what I want to do is come up with some random phase angle and then show that the tangent is the same
thing as sine divided by cosine.
So let's come up with a random phase angle.
Now of course you know all about coming up with random numbers.
So we want one random number.
And now this is going to be scaled between 0 and 1.
So to get this to be a random angle in radians we have to multiply it by pi.
So and then what I'm going to do is compute the tangent and that's going to be in PI dot Tan of the
angle and then I want the let's call this SC for sine divided by cosine so n Pitot sign of the angle
divided by the cosine of this same angle.
So how can I show that these two are equal to each other.
Well in theory what I want to do is say something like 10 equals sine divided by cosine.
What I'm gonna do instead is move both sides or subtract both sides of this equation by sine cosigner
SC and now the thing that I'm testing is this equation here but we don't need the right hand side of
this equation.
I'm just going to subtract these two and it turns out that they are zero and that's not just some random
things that actually let me do it this way and say print the angle and then the difference between tangent
and sine divided by cosine and you can see that regardless of what the angle ends up being the difference
between these is always zero and then of course sometimes there's this computer rounding error.
So we get 10 to the minus 15 which is essentially the same thing as zero.
All right.
Since we're on the topic of trig identities there's another trig identity that I want to illustrate
to you.
And that is possibly one of the most important trigonometric identities which is that cosine squared
plus sine squared equals one.
So this is what I want to demonstrate to you or at least illustrate in examples.
So let's take some theta as theta is and set that to be linearly space numbers from 0 to 2 times pi.
And let's go for maybe 13 steps between 0 and 2 Pi.
And now I'm going to compute num Pi the cosine of theta is squared plus num paid out sign of theta is
again squared.
And let's just see what this happens to be.
All right.
So the answer is a vector of one's a num pi array that contains all ones.
So for all of these vectors and actually let's.
We can do it this way we can say print theta is and then print
the answer to here.
So for all of these different theta.
These are all different numbers but when we take the cosine and then square that.
Add that to the sign of those angles and then square that the number is always 1.
The result is always 1.
So that's a pretty important trig identity to commit to memory in this video we worked a little bit
more with trig functions and in particular perhaps the most important concept that I discussed in this
video was this issue of resolution when translating formulas that are sort of analog and they exist
out there in the real world in a continuous fashion to implementing those formulas in code where you
have to disk ties and come up with some specific set of numbers to evaluate those formulas.
And that resolution is not trivial.
That's an important part of doing math with Python or with computers more generally so there are two
exercises associated with this video with this title.
And both of those exercises are going to come in the next video.
So keep watching.